## Overall Game Flow

Settlers takes place in Western Europe roughly in the period 750 to
1250, roughly speaking from the introduction of the horse collar to
the beginnings of plate armour. Alternatively, it covers the system of
manorialism from its beginnings to somewhat after the peak, with
long-distance trade and large-scale kingdoms becoming important in the
endgame. I envision Settlers gameplay as being roughly divided into
three parts:

### Opening

Beginnings of manorialism, decentralised defense against raiders,
investment in self-sufficient closed economic units. 

In this phase the
player's emphasis is on fighting the environment, in the form of
both howling wilderness and howling savage raiders, and building up
extremely local productive capital; there is almost no trade between
separate manors, nor do they particularly help defend each other, so
each one must be an autarkic little fortress.

Note that when the player places a piece in an empty tile, they are
not creating the resulting village de novo; rather they are organising
the pre-existing subsistence farmers into a new social form - as well
as claiming them as their people.

There are two main forms of social organisation the player can lay
down: Smallholders and manors. A smallholder village has decentralised
land ownership, with many independent farmers each owning a few
fields. A manor consists of a single large landowner who rents out his
land to a large number of tenants, most likely by an unfree tenure -
in other words, the tenants are serfs, villeins, crofters,
leilendinger, and other such terms. The smallhold village is more
productive, but cannot mobilise as much of its resources for defense
as the manor. It will field an infantry levy which cannot go far from
the fields or stay on campaign for very long, versus the manor's
full-time cavalry which are fewer in number, but have much greater
mobility, striking power per soldier, and ability to project power at
a distance.

Bonus options for this phase include transhumance farming, swidden
farming, and plain nomadry; the advantages and disadvantages of these
pieces are TBD.

Apart from villages, opening pieces include three-field systems,
mills, churches, watchtowers, and earthwork forts.

### Midgame

Opening of the manors, beginning of cities, regional defenses and
power projection, investment in connecting infrastructure.

The midgame begins when players start connecting their self-sufficient
manor economies with roads, enabling them to trade and thus compensate
for each others' weaknesses. This requires larger-scale institutions
to keep the peace - counties to keep the barons from feuding, as it
were; this is a useful time to learn the words 'Raubgraf' and
'Landfriede'. Such trade also enables some tiny market cities, which
will need defenses both against larger-scale raiders (the counts will
need to exercise their armies once the barons are subdued, after
all...) and against their own nobility. Further, the surplus resources
and their movement on newly-built roads make banditry a more viable
option than it was before, and so the player must also try to keep
order internally - while not neglecting his defenses against outside
raiders. 

Midgame pieces are roads, harbours, bridges, motte-and-bailey castles,
monasteries, early cathedrals, and city walls.

### Endgame

Decline of manorialism, market economics, powerful cities, royal
armies and centralised defense, investment in overseas trade and
supporting institutions.

In the endgame the player knits together their regional institutions
into kingdoms, taking down internal trade barriers, creating centralised
armies able to both overawe individual counts and effectively project
power across long distances, and organising international trade on a
large scale. The player now faces a choice of emphasis in his social
organisations, between 'monarchical' (OTL outcome in France, Spain,
Italian and German middle powers); 'mercantile' (Italian trading
republics, Hanseatic League, England to some degree); 'peasant'
(alt-historical option though Dithmarschen, Poland, and the Nordic
countries all point the direction), and 'theocratic' (Papal State,
prince-bishoprics, later Swiss cantons and Hussites). Roughly speaking
the monarchical direction emphasises the military, mercantile favours
investment, peasantry favours consumption, and church favours
spirituality and ritual.

Endgame pieces are curtain-wall castles, beacon systems, bankers and
guilds, shipyards and arsenals, cathedrals, large cities, and
deepwater harbours.
